xdp-log: Do not mention PerfEventArray (#94)
aya-rs/book: docs/book/start/parsing-packets.md

# Parsing Packets

In the previous chapter, our XDP application ran until Ctrl-C was hit and permitted
all the traffic. Each time a packet was received, the BPF program created a logged
the string "received a packet" for each packet received. In this chapter we're
going to show how to parse packets.

While we could go all out and extract data all the way up to L7, we'll constrain
our example to L3, and to make things easier, IPv4 only.

!!! example "Source Code"

    Full code for the example in this chapter is available [here](https://github.com/aya-rs/book/tree/main/examples/xdp-log)

## Using Network Types

> To get useful data to log, we first need some useful data structures to

Reviewer: We're going to log the source ip address of incoming packets. So we'll need to: 

- Read the ethernet header to determine if we're dealing with an IPv4 packet, else terminate parsing
- Read the source IP Address from the IPv4 header

We could read the specifications of those protocols and parse manually, but instead we're going to use the network-types crate which provides convenient type definitions for many of the common internet protocols.

Let's add it to ...

to populate with data from the `XdpContext`.
We want to log the Source IP Address of incoming traffic, so we'll need to:

1. Read the Ethernet Header to determine if this is an IPv4 Packet
1. Read the Source IP Address from the IPv4 Header

The [network-types crate](https://crates.io/crates/network-types) provides
networking structs, including `EthHdr` and `Ipv4Hdr` which we are ging to use
in our program.

Let's add it to our eBPF crate by adding a dependency on `network-types` in our
`xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml`:

=== "xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml"

    ```toml linenums="1"
    --8<-- "examples/xdp-log/xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml"
    ```

## Getting Packet Data From The Context And Into the Map

The `XdpContext` contains two fields, `data` and `data_end`.

> `data` is a pointer to the start of the data in kernel memory and `data_end`, a

Reviewer: `XdpContext` contains two fields that we're going to use: `data` and `data_end`, which are respectively a pointer to the beginning and to the end of the packet.

In order to access the data in the packet and to ensure that we do so in a way that keeps the eBPF verifier happy, we're going to introduce an helper function called `ptr_at`. The function ensure that before we access any data, we insert the bound checks which are required by the verifier.

pointer to the end of the data in kernel memory. In order to access this data
and ensure that the eBPF verifier is happy, we'll introduce a helper function
called `ptr_at`. This function will ensure that before we access any data, we

> check that it's contained between `data` and `data_end`. It is marked as `unsafe`

Reviewer: ptr_at can actually be made safe: returning a pointer is safe even if the pointer is not aligned, what is unsafe is _deferencing_ the pointer.

Reviewer: You've marked this as resolved but in the code ptr_at is still unsafe. It shouldn't be.

because when calling the function, you must ensure that there is a valid `T` at
that location or there will be undefined behaviour.

With our helper function in place, we can:

> 1. Read the Ethertype field to check if we have an IPv4 packet.

Reviewer: You say this above, no need to repeat it. Just say:

Finally to access individual fields from the ethernet and IPv4 headers, we're going to use the memoffset crate, let's add a dependency for it in myapp-ebpf/Cargo.toml

# Parsing packets

In the previous chapter, our XDP application ran until Ctrl-C was hit and

> permitted all the traffic. Each time a packet was received, the BPF program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
permitted all the traffic. Each time a packet was received, the eBPF program
```

> created a logged the string "received a packet" for each packet received. In

Reviewer: ```suggestion
logged the string `"received a packet"`. In
```

> this chapter we're

Reviewer: reindent this please

going to show how to parse packets.

> While we could go all out and extract data all the way up to L7, we'll constrain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While we could go all out and parse data all the way up to L7, we'll constrain
```

    [here](https://github.com/aya-rs/book/tree/main/examples/xdp-log)

## Using network types

We're going to log the source ip address of incoming packets. So we'll need to:

* Read the ethernet header to determine if we're dealing with an IPv4 packet,
  else terminate parsing.
* Read the source IP Address from the IPv4 header.

We could read the specifications of those protocols and parse manually, but
instead we're going to use the [network-types](https://crates.io/crates/network-types)
crate which provides convenient type definitions for many of the common Internet
protocols.

Let's add it to our eBPF crate by adding a dependency on `network-types` in our
`xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml`:

=== "xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml"

    ```toml linenums="1"
    --8<-- "examples/xdp-log/xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml"
    ```

## Getting packet data from the context and into the map

`XdpContext` contains two fields that we're going to use: data and data_end,
which are respectively a pointer to the beginning and to the end of the packet.

In order to access the data in the packet and to ensure that we do so in a way
that keeps the eBPF verifier happy, we're going to introduce an helper function

> called `ptr_at`. The function ensure that before we access any data, we insert

Reviewer: ```suggestion
called `ptr_at`. The function ensures that before we access any packet data, we insert
```

the bound checks which are required by the verifier.

Finally to access individual fields from the ethernet and IPv4 headers, we're
going to use the memoffset crate, let's add a dependency for it in
`xdp-log-ebpf/Cargo.toml`.

> To do this efficiently we'll add a dependency on `memoffset = "0.8"` in our

Reviewer: remove this

`myapp-ebpf/Cargo.toml`

!!! tip "Reading fields using `offset_of!`"

    As there is limited stack space, it's more memory efficient to use the
    `offset_of!` macro to read a single field from a struct, rather than reading
    the whole struct and accessing the field by name.

The resulting code looks like this:

```rust linenums="1" title="xdp-log-ebpf/src/main.rs"
--8<-- "examples/xdp-log/xdp-log-ebpf/src/main.rs"
```

> 1. Create our map.

Reviewer: looks like this isn't used anymore

> 2. Here's `ptr_at`, which gives ensures packet access is bounds checked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Here we define `ptr_at` to ensures that packet access is always bound checked.
```

> 3. Using `ptr_at` to read our ethernet header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Here we use `ptr_at` to access the ethernet header.
```

> 4. Logging the IP address and port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Here we log ip and port.
```
